thank you for joining us as we journey
through the Great Book of Exodus and
thank you very much the DW plus crew for
having the vision and generosity of
spirit to make this Exodus seminar
produced at no small cost and
substantial risk freely available to all
who are interested on YouTube
perhaps you might consider a daily wire
Plus subscription it's a Bastion of free
speech and we have great content there
with much more to come we journeyed to
Athens Rome and Jerusalem to film a
four-part documentary series on Western
civilization and have additionally
recorded specials on marriage Vision the
pitfalls and opportunities for adventure
and masculinity all of which are
exclusively available there these join
many of the Beyond order public lectures
that made up my recent tour and my
extensive back catalog fully uncensored
onward and upward
thank you
foreign
I have the great privilege today of
opening a seminar on Exodus in eight
part seminar
as many of you know and some of you
don't I did a lecture series on Genesis
in the fall of 2017 walking through that
old book and that
had a reasonable impact I would say for
that sort of venture it was popular
publicly
the theater I rented sold out 16 times
in a row and then millions of people
have watched it online and that's really
been something and I'd had a dream after
doing that well and before as well that
I would be able to walk through the
entire Corpus of the Bible over the
course of my life and that's a very
daunting challenge but the next step is
Exodus and I've been looking for
to that for a very long time I thought
before I did the public lecture series
because that's not what this is that I
would find a variety of Scholars from
around the world if I could and
and see if I could figure out a way to
bring them together to talk about Exodus
in detail to help me fill in my
knowledge of this book before I do a
public lecture series on Exodus which I
plan to do in June of 2023 and so I've
brought together some of the sharpest
and most interesting and deepest people
that I've Had The Good Fortune to meet
in the last decade or so and they've all
graciously agreed to come here to Miami
and to spend eight days concentrating on
this book and under the auspices of the
daily wire plus group who've flown them
in and who are producing this and
editing it and have done everything they
can to make this possible and beautiful
and as available as it might be so this
material or much of it will be behind
the daily wire paywall will have a
free-flowing discussion I'm going to
read the text and I'm going to say what
I have to say about it and hopefully not
too much for me and I'm going to let the
gentleman that are with me
have their say and hopefully we're all
going to learn an awful lot about this
ancient story and what it means and why
it's significant today and
um and why it's been significant for
several thousand years and so I'll get
everybody first of all to introduce
themselves and I'm going to start with
Dr Douglas Headley on my left and we'll
go around this way and Dr Headley well
my name is Douglas Headley and I'm a
fellow at the University of Cambridge
fellow of Claire college and I teach the
philosophy of religion and I think
there's a crisis in our culture and the
crisis is linked to a certain ignorance
of the very backbone of our own culture
and the Bible is very much at the core
of our cultural inheritage
at the
Temple of Apollo in Delphi there was an
inscription know thyself and we're in
danger of
not being able to know ourselves because
of the ignorance of the very foundations
of our culture so that's one reason why
I'm particularly
fascinated by Dr Peterson's Endeavors in
the last few years and intrigued by the
developments
um in the next few days
I warmed your invitation because I was
born in China
and I was a seven-year-old in the
Chinese Revolution
and when I was later an Oxford student I
had dinner with sir Isaiah Berlin the
great Jewish philosopher and as it
turned out he'd been a seven-year-old in
the Russian Revolution
and comparing notes on it we were saying
what the revolutions meant but the lack
of people today understanding them and
for me Exodus obviously a classic in its
own right politically
the birth of a great nation and people
but many people don't realize this is
behind the English Revolution
and also behind the American Revolution
and to understand that throws an
incredible light on the present crisis
because as I say you've got a basic
Clash
between ideas coming down from the
American Revolution
1776 which came from the Torah
and ideas which come down from the
French Revolution and it says and so
we've got a profound crisis and many
people don't understand the roots of it
on either side
so what you're doing I think is
immensely significant
Dr Orr James Orr my name is James Orr
I'm assistant professor in philosophy of
religion at the University of Cambridge
where I teach philosophy religion and
moral philosophy theological ethics and
much of that work focuses on what you
might call the Hellenic that is to say
the the Fountain of Western wisdom in
Greek philosophy
too often I think we neglect the hebraic
that is to say the contribution to
western thought of the great hebraic
sources and most of all of course the
Torah the pentateuch it's thrilling to
be able to sit around and talk with
these distinguished friends and with you
Dr Peterson about about the book of
Exodus
um as Oz was saying it has enormous
significance historically the English
Revolution the American Revolution and
more recently many of the sort of
Liberation narratives that we're
familiar with in the Contemporary from
the Contemporary political landscape and
contemporary debates
so I'm fascinated to be talking about
these issues particularly when we get
talking about the decalogue The Ten
Commandments the significance of this
extraordinary claim almost without
precedent that morality has given not
and discovered and not simply invented
and constructed and that's one of I
think many many vital themes to our age
that we'll be exploring productively in
the days ahead I hope
Dennis Prager welcome
Dr Peterson and all of you it's a joy to
be with you uh I am living my dream in
my life being here
and that is to spread the Torah to the
world
I am a religious Jew and
I
I'm blessed to know Biblical Hebrew I
started it as the age of five I still
have to translate to English whenever I
think of a verse
the Torah uh is this is not known to
almost any non-jew the Torah is Primus
interparas in the Bible first among
equals
I was raised and I still believe that
the Torah is from God
how God delivered it is his business I
have no particular interest in the
methodology only in the ultimate
authorship
and I've written three of the five
volumes of a Torah commentary called the
rational Bible
including Exodus which interestingly was
the first one that I did given
that it has thy favorite document in
history The Ten Commandments and as I
say on my American talk show
if you want to defund the police there's
actually a way have everyone live by the
Ten Commandments then you can defund the
police
so that is uh that is where I come from
in this discussion and I trust you will
all differ appropriately to a member of
the chosen people
[Laughter]
Dr Stephen Blackwood
thanks Jordan it's real pleasure to be
here I'm Stephen Blackwood I'm the
president of Ralston College in Savannah
Georgia in effort to revive and reinvent
the traditional University
I grew up reading the Bible quite a lot
the I'd say the
Bible gave me the primary images through
which I came to understand
myself and the world then when I went to
University I
sort of stumbled into the discovery of
philosophy and literature especially of
the the Greek and Roman you might say
the backdrop to
to Western culture in the in the ancient
sense and since Sanders spent quite a
lot of time thinking about the relation
between that tradition and the biblical
tradition and the way in which those uh
are synthesized and in a way in which
that synthesis is fundamentally what
gives rise to our principles and
institutions in the Western World
um I suppose I'm particularly excited to
be here because I as others have said do
profoundly think that we're living in a
time in which we've lost the images
through which we can make sense of
ourselves and of the world in a way
that's adequate to
to the the longings of our own nature so
uh hopefully we'll
hopefully these images will come to be
alive for us and for those who
uh decide to listen to this afterwards
great
Jonathan pajo another Canadian that's
right uh so I'm Jonathan Pedro I am an
artist and I'm someone who for a very
long time has been reading the Bible and
I've been thinking about it more like an
artist I would say in terms of structure
in terms of rhyme and Rhythm and so I'm
interested in the book of Exodus more as
a mystical text and uh based in the
Christian it's actually there's a small
little book called The Life of Moses by
Saint Gregory of Nissa which is one of
the foundations of Christian mysticism
and so I will be approaching the book
mostly through that through how it
describes a structure narrative
structure which is also a geographic
structure the mountain the temple uh the
Tabernacle and how this uh fits with
even our own perception of reality and
how reality comes together how how chaos
can be brought into order and so that is
really the way that I'll be looking at
it so I'm really looking forward to this
very diverse discussion excellent so one
of the things that's really fascinated
me about Exodus apart from the the
fundamental structure of the narrative
which is escape from tyranny sojourn
through the desert and then re-emergence
hypothetically into the promised land
it's a very classic narrative structure
descent and riacent is the fact that is
the manner in which God is represented
as the primary spirit in the text and so
I've been toying with this idea that
part of what the Bible is doing is
describing a
up a priority a manner in which
perceptions and actions might be
prioritized and for a structure of
priority is a pyramidal structure and
something has to be at the top and I
learned from Carl Jung that whatever is
at the top of your hierarchy of
assumptions functions as God for you
whether or not you're religious and
maybe you have multiple things at the
top which just means that you're
confused and then if Jung is correct and
I believe he is then the question of
what should be at the top really exists
as the Paramount question and part of
the way the biblical narrative
represents that or addresses that is by
describing God in some sense as a
literary character as Northrop fry a
Canadian critic pointed out and one of
the things that's remarkable about the
Exodus text is that the highest
ethical
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny and that's put forward
as a prime ethical dictum so if it's the
voice of God speaking to you so to speak
then it's going to call you out of
slavery maybe the slavery of your own
mind the slavery of external conditions
the slavery of the Tyranny it's going to
call you out of that slavery into
Freedom even if that pulls you into the
desert and that's really something
that's really something to know and I
think something that's deeply true all
right so having said that and introduced
everybody we're going to start with the
text and all as I said I'll read it and
I'll make comments when they strike me
and we'll have everyone jump in and Away
will go so Exodus 1. now these are the
names of the children of Israel which
came into Egypt every man and his
household
came with Jacob
Reuben Simeon Levi and Judah
issachar zebulun and Benjamin
Dan and naftali Gad and Asher
and all the souls that came out of the
loins of Jacob were 70 Souls for Joseph
was in Egypt already and Joseph died
and all his brethren
and all that generation
and the children of Israel were fruitful
and increased abundantly and multiplied
and waxed exceeding mighty
and the land was filled with them
so Jacob and the Israelites are
presented as sojourners into into Egypt
so they're foreigners they're Strangers
In a Strange Land you might say and they
came in under the uh the guidance and
patrimony of Jacob who had a good
relationship with the power structure in
Egypt but he dies and his the generation
after him dies and relationships between
the Israelites and the Egyptians become
strained it is commenting while you read
okay comment at any point you want so
just for all of your edification in
Jewish life
if there are 10 best known verses in the
entire Torah a new king arose over Egypt
who did not know Joseph
is one of the ten
it summarizes the human condition of
ingratitude perfectly
Joseph had saved the Egyptians from
starvation and the next Pharaoh doesn't
even know his name
so he's forgotten the debts he has
forgotten the debts he has entirely
but this is as I say I The Human
Condition we have forgotten our debts in
America to Washington Madison Jefferson
this and there arose a new generation in
America who who knew not Madison you
that could be a perfect verse right okay
okay okay
now now there arose up a new king over
Egypt
which knew not Joseph
and he said unto his people behold the
people of the children of Israel are
more and mightier than we
come on let us deal wisely with them
lest they multiply and it come to pass
that when there falleth out any War
they join also unto our enemies and
fight against us
and so get them up out of the land
there's an accusation of a crime before
it's committed right these people are
just a threat and a plague and we can't
trust them and that's part of this
ingratitude as well and a breakdown of
trust and that's definitely that
definitely sets the stage for conflict
the breakdown of trust therefore
they did set over them task Masters to
afflict them with their burdens
and they build for Pharaoh treasure
cities pithome and Ramses so the
response to the hypothetical Crimes of
the Israelites was to enslave them and
one of the things we should notice very
early on in this is that the the book of
Exodus regards that move of enslavement
as fundamentally wrong it's like an
axiomatic precondition of the narrative
itself and modern people I suppose don't
find that surprising because we all
believe that slavery is wrong but it
isn't obvious that most of the countries
and Nations that in the past practice
slavery
regarded it as wrong and so this
invisible ethic that already permeates
The Narrative has a revolutionary aspect
in that sense but the more they
Afflicted them
the more they multiplied and grew
and they were grieved because of the
children of Israel and the Egyptians
made the children of Israel to serve
with rigor
and they made their lives better with
hard bondage in mortar and in Brick and
in all manner of service in the field
all their service
wherein they made them serve
was with rigor that that reminds me that
part of of what happened in the in under
the Nazis with uh with work camps and in
the gulags as well right this idea that
you identify your enemies and then you
sentence them to hard labor in your
service against their will and so you
see this idea echoed very early in this
story and something that's definitely
echoed through the 20th century yeah so
but there's really this idea that the
with the Pharaoh is doing is reducing
wants to reduce Israel to potential for
Egypt basically and you'll see it later
when he he wants to get rid of the men
he just wants women and so in this image
and it's it repeats even the story of
Abraham you know how pharah wants to
take his wife it's about taking the
potential of another people and try to
subjugate it to you to yourself so it's
a reflection of instrumental usage
that's right yeah and so you know you
you can see that in people's proclivity
to use one another interpersonally
because when you're talking to someone
you can decide a priori what you want
from them and then you can bend your
words and your interactions so that you
exploit what they have to offer for your
purposes or you can engage in honest
dialogue where the purpose is mutual
enrichment and that that what would you
call it instrumental in doesn't dominate
yeah so and you can experience it like
at least the mystical fathers they talk
about Egypt also is representing your
own passions that is you become a slave
to something and then you become an
instrument of that thing right so it's
like you I don't know anything that you
have that you'd like to eat and then
then you you're there and at first when
eating knows you like when your passion
knows you then then you're fine it's in
the right order things are in the right
order but when your passion or desires
or whatever Behavior you have forgets
you then you become an instrument of it
like think of a drug a drug addict where
everything they do serves this Tyrant
and so all their potential it gets it
you get reduced a potential for uh
behavior
in some sense that might be your stomach
or your lust and so that's very
interesting too because the word Israel
means we who struggle with God and so
what that would mean psychologically is
that the that which should be at the
highest place which is the part of you
that's struggling with the highest is
then subordinated instrumentally to
something that should be lower in the
ethical hierarchy and that could be your
own inner tyranny and it could be
someone else's instrumental will or some
State's instrumental will and that's
that's portrayed as fundamentally
inappropriate in this text and you'll
see and it it it's imaged as this idea
of making bricks you know and it's
that's a reference to Babel as well you
know it's like this idea of wanting to
be higher than God or wanting to replace
God and so we make civilization that's
what Brits are we make civilization and
then we think that Civilization replaces
the highest ideal I don't know Dennis
would agree with this but I know some
rabbis believe that Israel was judged
when they were divided because Solomon
was becoming almost a second pharaoh
with a convey of the people and forced
labor and so on and he was bringing a
kind of slavery in at the end and
getting too much Israel's called to be
in anti-agient
constantly becoming too much
for your interest uh
the uh there are two tyrannies this is
the overriding theme I believe of the
whole Torah external tyranny to pharaohs
internal tyranny to your lusts Etc to
yourself
and the Torah actually has a law
which many Jews still observe
where you count every day between
Passover and Pentecost Shavuot
chevalot is the seven weeks after you do
this for seven weeks every day you
actually count with a blessing using
God's name this is the seventh day of
the 49 days and so on why
you can't have freedom from Pharaoh if
you don't have freedom from you so Sinai
is the second freedom
not now you you you have to be liberated
from external tyranny and now
The Liberation from internal tyranny is
the Ten Commandment well that begs the
question too then doesn't it that that
that I think the Bible in some sense is
aggregated to answer which is
well is there something other than
various forms of tyranny
and if there is an alternative to
tyranny and maybe that's Freedom
whatever that is or maybe it's holy
freedom
then that's qualitatively different than
mere subjugation to one tyranny among
others my students used to ask me when I
was teaching my maps of meeting course
how do you know that what you're
teaching isn't just another ideology
which is another tyranny in some sense
and that's an extremely that's an
extremely deep question and the
postmodern types would say well it's all
ideology it's all tyranny you just pick
whichever tyranny you you want to abide
by but it's all a matter of power or
something like that there's no
Transcendent orientation that pops you
outside of the realm of well of tyranny
in some real sense so and the biblical
narrative insists that that is not the
case so it's a pretty dismal view a that
it's just a choice among tyrannies but
to pick up Dennis's great point of the
two tyrannies that Lord Acton the famous
saying all power tends to corrupt you
know
power oppresses the weak that's the
obvious one and it happens here but it
corrupts the powerful right and that's
what happens to Pharaoh yeah and there
is such a thing as corruption right so
that that's an absolute that's an
absolute reality the corruption that
power tends to produce of course that's
partly why the pharaoh's heart is
hardened as well and yeah it's a very
good it's a very germane observation
that slavery corrupts the slaver as much
as the slave or perhaps you can say
perhaps even more right because it it
incites within the slaver something like
as luciferian presumption and entices
him for instrumental reasons into
denying the Divinity of someone else and
then acting in the manner of someone who
devised denies Divinity per se right
absolutely pernicious and and corrosive
so and the king of Egypt spake to the
Hebrew midwives of which the name of the
one was Shipra and the name of the other
Pua and he said when you do the office
of a midwife to the Hebrew women and see
them upon the birthing stools if it be a
son
then you shall kill him
and that's that instrumental usage that
you were talking about before there is a
huge issue here
the Hebrew is completely indeterminative
whether the midwives were Hebrews or not
and I'm not going to throw out Hebrew
often methods I I feel very
self-conscious at all
but for those who know Hebrew they will
know what I'm talking about it can be
the Hebrew midwives or The Midwives of
the Hebrews there is no possible way
based on those two words to know which
it is I am convinced and Jewish
tradition doesn't agree with me I mean
post-biblical Jewish tradition the Torah
I think does agree with me but Celebi
uh I don't I believe they were they were
Egyptian I do not believe he would have
ordered he Hebrew midwives to murder
every Hebrew boy do you think there's a
do you think there's a purposeful
ambiguity there to leave it up to
questions that's beautiful it may well
be that's right well it certainly is the
Hebrew the Hebrew is is ambiguous that
is I mean if a tyranny gets corrupt
enough then people turn against
themselves that's right however
just on logical grounds when he gets
angry at them
for not doing it it would be odd if you
get angry at Hebrews for not killing
Hebrews but my biggest proof you're
coming to
where they s it says that they feared
God and didn't listen to Pharaoh again
it's one of my favorite lines in the
whole Bible
you either fear humans or you fear God
fear God is the root of freedom and
wisdom and the
[Music]
the word for God is Not Jehovah or
Yahweh it's Elohim
so when Jews fear God it's generally
feared Yahweh and in this case it's fear
Elohim and the universal word for God
and I'm convinced that they are
Egyptians
are you looking to dive deeper into the
entire Bible look no further than the
hollow app the number one Prayer app in
the world featuring an entire category
of content to help you dive deeper into
prayer and meditation on the Bible by
studying the Bible you'll gain a deeper
appreciation for the power of
Storytelling symbolism and metaphor
enriching your understanding of
literature across different genres go
through the Bible in a year with father
Mike Schmitz or hear the Bible narrated
by renowned actors like Jonathan Rumi
from the chosen or Jim Caviezel from the
sound of Freedom hallow has over ten
thousand audio guided prayers
meditations and music to deepen your
understanding and knowledge of the Bible
the Halo app also helps you connect with
a community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along your path to
spiritual growth download the app for
free at hallow.com Exodus you can set
reminders and track your progress along
the way enrich your education and
nurture your mind and soul today
download the Hello app at hallow.com
Exodus that's hallow.com Exodus
hallow.com Exodus for an exclusive
three-month free trial of all six
thousand plus prayers and meditations
[Music]
Douglas do you have any sense of what it
means In this passage and more broadly
that the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom and and an appropriate let's say
precondition for Freedom why why do you
think it's conceptualized as as fear
well I think there's uh a proper fear
that in this case I think is linked to
Transcendence
so um there's the the fear of the the
Tyrant which is normal and natural
um and which we are all subject to but
there should be a greater fear I the
fear of the Transcendence
violating that right right
um and of course this is why the uh
post-modern
attack on traditional Western culture is
so dangerous I mean of course it goes
back to the very origins of Western
culture with the sophies but the idea
that there is no such thing as a an
objective moral order and there
certainly is no Transcendent basis for
that
um that would make this whole narrative
unintelligible it also makes the Tyrant
the final Arbiter in some real sense
right
you know people have asked me and I'm
always embarrassed by this but people
have commented on my courage for
speaking up so to speak and I think you
don't actually understand the situation
I'm not courageous in my speaking up I'm
more afraid of the alternative and part
of the reason for that was that when I
was a clinician I spent thousands tens
of thousands of hours dealing with
people's serious problems one of the
things I learned was and I really
learned this was that
you don't get away with anything
and so you might think you can bend the
fabric of reality and that you can treat
people instrumentally and that you can
bow to the Tyrant without and violate
your conscience without cost but that is
just not the case the the you will pay
the piper when you pay you might not
even notice the causal connection
between the sin and the payment and one
of the things you do in Psychotherapy is
people's lives take a Twist and they go
very badly wrong and when you walk back
through people's lives with them you
come to these Choice points where you
meet the devil at the crossroads and you
find out that well you went left let's
say in downhill when you should have
gone right and uphill and now you're
paying the price for that and you don't
impose that as a therapist
you help people
discover that or rediscovered because
they often know at the time that they've
made an error and then forget and then
rationalize the forgetting and then you
know and then multiply the lies and so
but that's that's tremendously difficult
to do within a secular frame I mean I
think
you found ways of of doing that I think
Jordan I'm thinking actually of somebody
like Victor Frankl and his uh his idea
that that sense of the logos of a kind
of a meaning is what gives you a kind of
existential drive and helped him survive
the the horrors of the Holocaust but
more typically it's it's religion it's a
sort of religious framing that it gives
people this the power to resist tyranny
well that that religious framing seems
in part even if you think about it in a
secular sense is that like when you're
maybe you're making a choice to do the
instrumental and easy thing but there's
part of you that knows that that's wrong
not always sometimes you just make a
mistake because you don't know but but
often you know and yet you pick the
easier path let's say and the part of
the manner in which God is portrayed
throughout the biblical Corpus but I
would say in in Traditions around the
world as that phenomena
phenomenon that
that alerts you to your own misbehavior
and it is really something again I
really learned from Young Contra Freud
in some real sense is that
and contranisha who believe that maybe
we could create our own values is that
there's something within that is
transcendent because it isn't only in
you it's in everyone in some fundamental
and real sense plus it's Eternal in some
fundamental and real sense and it calls
you on your misbehavior potentially in
God culture is approaching and kind of
Crisis point in other words the
postmodernists everything's constructive
truth is not there Etc no reality except
what you make it but of course truth is
always about something as C.S Lewis used
to say and what it's about is reality
well there's this insistence and people
are going to hit the wall that point up
to point today on the post because there
is reality it's as if we're insisting
that there is nothing other than towers
of Babel there isn't anything they're
being built against or shielding us from
it's it's just one Tower of Babel after
another and it can be and I can't help
but see a real tyrannical demand for
power in that because one of the things
I've often wondered is well why are the
constructivists the radical constructive
is so insistent that there's no core
human nature when
really the evidence that there's a core
human nature is pretty damn strong
particularly perhaps if you think
biologically so why with why this
insistence and I can't help but think
it's because well you want to remake
people in the image of your ideology and
so you have to insist that they have no
intrinsic nature because otherwise the
pesky realities of the Transcendent
nature get in the way of your luciferian
person no God no truth there is only
Power right right well that that's the
that's the Dostoevsky an issue in some
real sense isn't it I just I want to
pick up on what you said Dennis a little
before and I I want to propose that
there there might be a very important
narrative reason why the The Midwives or
or Hebrew in this case and the reason
and it I think it's a good lesson for us
today which is that the tyrant
is empowering women
to kill their men that is what the
Tyrant is doing and he's doing it in
order to feminize
the Hebrews
and uh and and I think and and I think
that no wonder you get in trouble
but I think I think that I think that
it's important and the reason why they
won't do it is because they fear God is
because they're able to see beyond the
power that the Pharaoh is handing them
at this moment and I think that when we
think that that couldn't happen like in
the people it's like look around you
we're seeing what happened before it's
very interesting because it also implies
that well it's in the best interest of
the Tyrant to dispense with those
figures who might pose a threat to the
Tyranny and those would be tough men
right because they're the ones who keep
the real such an intelligent point
that it it
reinforces your reaction to what I said
maybe the text is purposefully ambiguous
about whether or not they were Hebrews
or Egyptians and and you've swayed me
I've seen that purposeful ambiguity the
other texts so let me just say I I know
I identify a bias in me and I will
reveal it I I I I I'm I'm very I hope
self-aware good so the first learning
episode has actually occurred yeah right
exactly okay the Torah goes out of its
way this is one of the fundamental
beliefs of my life
to portray non-jews positively and Jews
negatively it's one of the reasons I
believe it's a Divine author if Jews had
made up the Torah they would have come
across much more positively they come
across as awful as a general rule and
non-jews from so propaganda
anti-propaganda certainly uh Noah Noah
is a non-jew of course there are no Jews
at that time uh but Moses's
father-in-law who was the the great uh
adviser to Moses is a is a midianite
priest the daughter of pharaoh is a
non-jew she saves Moses and uh it is
just a consistent pattern and I thought
that the midwives was part of that
pattern as I say that God is ethic
centered not ethnic centered okay and
this has taken as the first Civil
Disobedience isn't it that's right
that's the first example of someone
standing against a crime against
humanity and
um I don't come down either way but I
think you can make a strong point for
Dennis's right so that it implies that
the relationship with God is actually
what enables people to have the strings
to stand up against the Tyrant if you
think of the Nuremberg Trial they didn't
actually have a basis for what they were
saying there's no international law
right right they were reaching and maybe
the same thing is intuitively they know
well that's certainly what soldier
knitson thought about the nurburg trials
is he believed that the fact that
the the Nazi atrocities were regarded as
wrong
independent of cultural context he
thought that was a signal achievement of
the 20th century because it
re-established not so much the existence
of good but definitely the existence of
evil and that that was something I found
unbelievably convincing because I
thought well you're you've got a real
conundrum here it's like
was what the Nazis did Evil
or not because those are the
Alternatives and if it wasn't it's like
okay well you can move ahead on that
presumption or you can accept that it
was evil in it in a Transcendent sense
because that's what the Nuremberg trials
were about and then the the terrible
implication of that in some sense is
that if if evil genuinely exists
then it's opposite genuinely exists
because it's not going to exist without
its opposite and so as soon as you
accept the reality of the evil of
Auschwitz you're in a metaphysical World
in some sense because you have to
simultaneously posit the existence of a
Transcendent good that's at least the
opposite of that and part of what I've
been striving for for 40 years I would
say is to identify what is the opposite
of the spirit that produced Auschwitz
and some of it Soldier knits and
detailed out so nicely it's the spirit
of Truth and Frankel it's the spirit of
meaning and uh I think you can make a
strong case that it's the spirit of love
and it's some amalgam of those three
things and that doesn't exhaust it and
that's it's the spirit of play and
voluntary Association and freedom all
things that are stressed in the biblical
narrative and where there is no vision a
people perisheth in Proverbs and I think
there that's very important this notion
of uh well contemplation we we cut we'll
come to that in particularly chapter
three but this sense of a vision of
goodness as having an inspiring quality
uh and yeah and it is a vision too and
not just a mere verbal conceptualization
right which is why the artistic Endeavor
is so important and the architectural
Endeavor because it's not merely
propositional that Vision one of the
things I learned with my students and
with my clinical clients was that and I
helped them do this was to help people
develop a literal vision for their life
it's like okay you if you could have
what you wanted to arm you against the
slings and arrows of Fate let's say or
to at least defend you against it in
principle if you could have what you
needed and wanted
what would that look like that's a kind
of prayer it's like knocking the door
will open and ask and you will receive
it's like okay
you could conceivably have what you
wanted but you have to specify what it
is and you have to have a vision of it
and part of what the humanities
education should do and the religious
education certainly is to flesh out a
vision of of a mode of being and a mode
of perception that would justify
suffering or maybe even more than
justify it so well you could say I
suppose that if theists have faced with
the problem of evil atheists are
confronted with the problem of good try
how how to make sense of goodness how to
make sense of what it is that drives
their morally indignation and their
great social social revolutions I think
one of the most uh terrifying moments in
the Nuremberg trials was when the Nazis
Advanced the defense that they
effectively that this was simply
Victor's Justice that they had not
really broken any laws they were
scrupulous legislators after all and so
and following orders that's right and so
sort of Western Notions of justice found
themselves staring into the abyss how
how is it that we're going to make sense
of our deep intuition that this is evil
of an absolute kind and I think this is
one of the great as a matter of
historical fact one of the most
important motivating factors behind
um the emergence of the United Nations
Declaration of Human Rights of course in
1948 and with it the entire sort of
rights-based regime of
um of morality that is that is with us
still that is has proliferated and
expanded
um so the problem from The Atheist front
is on what basis can these things be
made can be claimed as self-evident
what's the grounding for that if it's
just not and the post-modern critique of
that in some sense is that well all that
nonsense talk about rights and freedoms
is just it's just instrumental
camouflage hiding a more fundamental
Will To Power and desire to oppress
right and the worry is that that the
only answer available in that in a
purely sort of secular framework would
be it's that because this document tells
us that this is wrong or this document
tells us that this is right right so
that becomes part of the social contract
and in which case the problem emerges
immediately again it's well that's just
arbitrary
effectively carries within it the the
sort of replicates the very problem that
it was trying to solve that's partly why
I'm often interested in talking to
biologists you know I've talked to
France to all most recently and he's a
primatologist who's worked on
elucidating the principles by which
chimpanzees organize their social
hierarchies and the Marxist really and
classic biological take on that for
simple-minded biologists is that the
chimps use Will To Power right the alpha
champ is the most powerful most dominant
meanest roughest you know boxer
oppressor and dewal's work conducted
over about 30 years has showed that
that's not all that's not just wrong
it's anti-true in some sense so it's
exactly the opposite of the reality now
and then you can get a chimp who rules
by power but it destabilizes the troop
emotionally and socially and his Reign
tends to be short brutal and meet and
extremely violent and murderous end it's
not an effective strategy and what dewal
has shown that is to stabilize the
iterative interactions within a troop
the alpha male who sometimes can be the
smallest male in the troop has to be
more reciprocal than any other
individual in the troop and so the basis
of chimpanzee power is peacemaking
reciprocity and stable long-term social
relations between males and between the
more authoritative males and females but
does that allow us to use the language
does that analysis allow us to use the
language of of goods of uh or or rather
are we only licensed by by dwells the
walls analysis to speak of adaptive
value reproductive Fitness well I'm kind
of hoping they go like this because you
know the idea of the reciprocity that
allows the alpha chimps to maintain
their sovereignty across time is
something very much like treat your
neighbor as if he's yourself and so I
think that there's no reason to assume
that the ethic if it's Transcendent
couldn't emerge out of the material and
descend in some sense from the spiritual
at the same without reducing goodness to
a mere morality to a mere survival
mechanism right well a mirror isn't it's
not so mere either right if it's a
survival mechanism it's pretty damn deep
and we could also think if we were
expanding our notion of what constitutes
the biological we could also think of
the the patterns of behavior that are
most germane to our survival as as
Transcendent they're embodied they're
instinctual they're outside the
propositional domain although often it's
the case that we think of the highest
moral act as as Extinction you know
laying down one's life that is
surrendering our opportunities for
survival and the survival of our kin
yeah well right so there are definitely
times where mere proximal survival seems
to contradict an even deeper Instinct I
mean I would say that the willingness of
tricky right because
my wife was talking to I think Janice
theme Engel recently about the behavior
of men when the Titanic was sinking and
many men sacrificed themselves to save
the women and the children and in a
sense that violates the purely
biological impetus for self-preservation
let's say but it if it's serving a
higher order ethical precept that is
even more fundamentally related to
survival across time than maybe the
contradiction could be ironed out I
suppose in evolutionary terms the
logical thing would would be though for
the women and the children to go first
on the Titanic yeah well the men are
more Expendable right because you need
fewer men if push comes to shove you
need fewer men but to go back to the
Hebrew Midwife although the Hebrew or
the Egyptian midwives they're
intuitively saying something against the
highest power in their Universe the
Pharaoh and and to their own danger well
exactly which is quite extraordinary and
you probably know the story of wh Jordan
coming to Faith I mean he is a
self-professed left-wing atheist
and early in World War II coming to take
refuge in New York he would follow the
documentaries weekly television and one
weekend he went in to see the
documentary on the siege of Poland and
Nazi Stormtroopers bayonetting women and
children and it was in the Upper East
Side a lot of Germans the war hadn't
America hadn't declared war the German
audience Cried Out kill them kill them
egging on their own countrymen America
was neutral
and Orden sat there in five minutes he
says
I can't say this is absolutely wrong
there are no episodes that's
old-fashioned whatevers believe that but
then he said I had to say there was an
absolute if this was absolutely wrong
and he said later I left the cinema the
Seeker after an unconditional absolute
and came to faith in God the only basis
foreign
because it could he's like one of the
things I've come to realize about the
symbol of the crucifix and I'm just
speaking psychologically here and not
theologically is that at the very least
what that symbol is is the it's the
impetus among billions of people across
2000 years to look at the worst thing
they could imagine
and so there's an idea that you come to
understanding of transcendent good most
particularly through focusing your
attention intently on what is undeniably
tragic and malevolent and that could be
I I really think that's true
psychologically because one of the
things I became convinced of studying
the Holocaust atrocities and the gulag
atrocities in particular was the
absolute reality of suffering and
malevolence
and then you think well because it's
pain suffering and and and cruelty
those are undeniable realities that's
the odd and experience and they say well
is there anything more real than pain
suffering and cruelty
and the answer would be
yes that which can transcend those three
things and it could easily be that you
cannot make contact with what transcends
those without
diving deep into the nature of those as
deep as possible and I certainly see the
biblical narrative focusing for example
on the crucifixion but not only that as
as the collective attempt of mankind in
some real sense to come to terms with
the worst that life has to offer and to
discover as a consequence something that
transcends that so much do you know the
story of Philip Haley you know the
Jewish scholar who spent his life
investigating the Nazi war crimes and
all that and one time he was so
depressed by what he was studying he was
ready to commit suicide and sitting in
his study with this wealth of literature
he picked up a little pamphlet he hadn't
read before and after about five minutes
of reading he thought there was a flying
it was a tear
his heart had been hardened and he read
the story of the Shambo the little
Huguenot Village that rescued 5 000
Jewish children
and he said it was hot cracking goodness
right right yeah and that was his
intuitive the woman who wrote the rape
of Nan King she committed suicide and no
wonder you know you look at that sort of
thing and if you look at it deeply it
just it just tears you into pieces and
then the question is is there anything
that can put you back together and that
really is the question it's the question
everybody faces in life in some real
sense right is how can you not be torn
apart into Despair and vengefulness by
catastrophe and malevolence and that is
the question that faces everyone so all
right The Midwives feared God and did
not as the king of Egypt commanded them
it's a lot of wrapped up in that line as
it turns out but saved the men children
alive
and the king of Egypt called for The
Midwives and said unto them
why have you done this thing and saved
the men children alive
and The Midwives said unto pharaoh
because the Hebrew women are not as the
Egyptian women for they are Lively and
are delivered before the midwives come
in unto them
therefore God dealt well with the
midwives
that's a very interesting line too
because
well do you want the Pharaoh on your
side or do you want God on your side
that's kind of the question and the
people multiplied and waxed very mighty
and so despite their persecution they're
doing fine and it came to pass because
the midwives feared God that he made
them houses
and Pharaoh charged all his people
saying so he's getting upset here every
son that is born you shall cast into the
river
and every daughter you shall save alive
so that's echoing that that that
emasculation of the people of Israel
here in the most fundamental sense so
that's Exodus one
Exodus 2
and their wind amount of the House of
Levi and took to wife a daughter of Levi
that's an important verse
it is
my favorite part of writing with
commentary over these years is to take
these verses that seem like nothing and
realize it's so important these are the
parents of the of the savior of the
Jewish people Moses
but there's nothing special about them
and that's what that verse says
a certain Man of the House of Levi went
and married a levite woman that's that's
a slowly birth Motif a lowly birth both
Thief uh a a he doesn't come from
royalty or Divine stock or or anything
just regular folks gave birth to Moses
right just regular photos yes very nice
very nice and the woman conceived and
bear a son
and when she saw him that he was a
goodly child she hid him three months
remember the Egyptians were going to
kill the firstborn Israelite males
and when she could no longer hide him
she took for him an arc of bull rushes
and dubbed it with slime and with pitch
a little boat and put the child there in
and she laid it in the flags by the
river's Brink can you see the word for
boat is the same as Noah's Ark oh yeah
this is the the saving of the world
again right okay so that's interesting
so she makes a little structure right
which is what you do with children is
you build a structure around them but
it's the word for the Noah's Ark okay
okay and this is also this is also the
first indicator of what becomes a very
profound symbolic Motif in The Exodus
story because Moses is allied with water
throughout the narrative whereas the
Pharaoh and Egypt are allied with stone
and stone seems permanent and immovable
but it's brittle and hard and and
lifeless and Moses is continually
represented as a master of water and
transformation and so this is the first
time you see that water is and water as
Moses is undoing he hits the Rock and
says I will get you water and not God
and and kit doesn't get into Israel
right well so so I guess that's when he
when he misuses his relationship with
his power over water and water is
chaotic right except from a symbolic
perspective and water is associated with
what you immerse yourself in when you're
baptized and water is like the
pre-cosmogonic chaos that begins that
exists at the beginning of time and so
for Moses to be a matter master of chaos
and water is also to make him
procedurally the antithesis of the
Tyrant because the Tyrant wants
everything in stone and solid and Moses
is the is the antithesis of that and
there's also I think there's also the
the one one thing that happens is you
have an extreme you have let's say the
Pharaoh and then you have water and what
happens is what Moses is going to be
doing between the entire story is making
that mediation between what is above and
what is below now you have this little
image of the Ark as being a little
microcosm which was what you see in
Genesis little microcosm of the world
that exists in this extreme right
because in the in the flood what you
have is a return to the beginning where
now it's Heaven and Earth and there's
nothing in between like it's both of
them can't sustain life there has to be
a hierarchy of of reality that gets
pulled out of the water and that's what
Moses is going to do he's going to go up
the mountain and bring down the law and
that is going to create that that
structure that mediation between because
even in the text we'll see later like
God is also
just God and the people doesn't seem to
work because God is constantly wanting
to consume them and it's like no no no
no no don't consume them so we need to
have this this mediation where being
lays itself out and kind of falls down
into the world in a way that is
appropriate one of the things Jung said
this is sort of relevant if you consider
psychedelic experiences as well which
can be far more than they then people
can tolerate
um Jung said part of the purpose of
religious practice was to stop people
from having religious experiences and
and he because he was very interested in
uh experiences that were extreme enough
to border on psychosis for example and
that if you don't have those
intermediary structures between you and
the absolutely Transcendent which might
be reality itself in the ethical and
material sense then that's just too much
that and you do see that echoed in
motifs like the burning bush where and
where God tells Moses later not to look
at him directly to at best to look at
his back right because you just can't
withstand that that direct contact with
something that exceeds your
comprehension in every Dimension
simultaneously no matter how good it is
no matter how
no matter how complete it is it's just
too much for for the Mortal soul to bear
and his sister
stood afar off to wit what would be done
to him and the daughter of pharaoh
not so interesting that she he's rescued
by the daughter of the Pharaoh came down
to wash herself at the river and her
maidens walked Along by the Riverside
and when she saw the ark among the flags
she sent her maid to fetch it
and when she opened it she saw the child
and behold
The Babe wept and she had compassion on
him and said this is one of the Hebrews
children that's an interesting
line from the jungian perspective as
well because Jung would have regarded
the anima the animating principle which
is the feminine Spirit as part of that
which is constantly antithetical to the
to the stone-like patriarchal Tyrant and
it's very interesting that it's the
pharaoh's own daughter who actually
proves her compassion her genuine
compassion for a helpless infant so
genuine compassion properly placed
constitutes part of the power that can
be used against the Tyrant and she's
she's placed exactly in the same
position as The Midwives were it's like
here's a Hebrew child and now it's once
again it's a it's a woman who says that
so it's like this is the you could say
that that's the role of the feminine is
to nurture is to give potential is to to
hold is to do all these things in order
for the the person to find their
independence right and is there not
something of a sorry of a paradox here
or if you say The Man from Nowhere the
possible figure in a way and yet he's
discovered by the the pharaoh's daughter
uh so he has dual he has okay so you see
this this Motif is replicated
unbelievably commonly as say the motif
of the orphan you see this with the with
the comic book character Superman most
particularly because Superman has
ordinary parents in I think he lands in
Kansas if I remember correctly and so
they're just ordinary Farmers but really
his parents are divine right they're
Heavenly and the Superman brings both of
those together and there is this Motif
that each of us are the sons or
Daughters of our fathers and mothers are
proximal fathers and mothers but
simultaneously we are the true Sons and
Daughters of the Divine culture let's
say and the spirit of culture and nature
and the spirit of Nature and so each of
us that's why when you're born lowly
let's say you're actually not because
regardless of where you're born you're
also the child of
well of everything of Nature and culture
and and of the Transcendence
simultaneously and indeed Christ I mean
born in the stable uh Carpenter but but
the davidic lineage so again you've got
that that that's why the descent into
Egypt is so important isn't it it's
clearly sort of recapitulating that that
the motif yeah but here a very obvious
Point all the heroes are women
yeah well it's so interesting that the
proper heroic Target of the women's
heroic action is in fact the helpless
infant right The Compassion isn't being
misplaced because compassion as far as I
can tell that over arching compassion
is particularly appropriate when it's
directed towards that which is truly
helpless but if it starts to be directed
as if towards infants to those who could
be competent then it starts to become
destructive so it's feminine compassion
in the right place here and so even even
if it's the pharaoh's daughter
yes true maternal virtues right which is
the care of the truly helpless and and
and and and well perhaps the truly
oppressed
then said his sister to Pharaoh's
daughter
shall I go and call to the nurse of the
Hebrew women that she may nurse the
child for thee
and the pharaoh's daughter said to her
go and the maid went and called the
child's mother so it's very sneaky of
the Hebrews and Pharaoh's daughter said
unto her take this child away so she
adopts him and nurse it for me and I
will give thee thy wages and the woman
took the child and nursed it and the
child grew and she brought him unto
Pharaoh's daughter and he became her son
so now he's the son of the king the
grandson of the of the Pharaoh so
interesting that that it's also a very
powerful as an adoptive father of two
two sons one biological one adoptive
and this is always spoken to me
profoundly that she is regarded as his
mother and she's clearly not his
biological mother in Jewish tradition
she is act which is remarkable to me
because you would think blood would be
dominant but in later Jewish tradition
she is called Batya the daughter of God
and she is regarded as Moses's mother
really interesting very interesting
for those who are interested in the the
Greek and have a more kind of have taken
on the Greek philosophy and everything
Saint Gregory of Nissa sees the
relationship between the two mothers and
the relationship between his allegiance
to Egypt and his allegiance to his
mother as the relationship that we have
with the Pagan past that is that we are
to learn and to be nurtured by our Pagan
ancestors and the Pagan stories and the
Pagan philosophers but to a degree to a
limit and that ultimately when you'll
see later Moses discovers or chooses his
true religion
uh by by ultimately killing the Egyptian
but that but that he won't completely
discount it you know and it's it's well
it's also the problem we all have when
we're being socialized because to some
degree to be socialized in a time and
place is to fall prey to the prevailing
tyranny right to become an avatar of
that culture that and the tyrannical
aspects of that as well but hopefully to
simultaneously unite that with you could
say the spirit of Israel which is the
striving towards the wrestling with God
and then to make that Paramount and so
Moses's lineage is representative of the
lineage of all of us and we struggle
with that right because now people are
ashamed of their
pharonic identity which is the
patriarchal tyranny and the capacity
that that has to produce the atrocities
of the past but we have to come to terms
with it and and the notion that Moses
kills the Pharaoh is some something like
the notion that well he overthrows
potato or he kills the Egyptian is that
you overthrow that Tyrant within even
though you you necessarily owe
Allegiance and then you follow something
higher something like that it's
important I mean this is quite an
obvious point but I think it's just
important dwelling on the point that
this is It's pharah's daughter it is a
this is a non-jewish moral agent who who
acts in a saintly way and I think this
gives us a first taste of a theme that's
going to come to dominate and morality
isn't Bound by ethnicity that's right
this is a great gift of the Jewish
people this this Insight that morality
is is universal is to is is a gift to
the world is something that that all all
human beings as it were abound to um
pull later in the New Testament makes
this point again in Romans 1 and chapter
1 of and chapter two of Romans the the
Gentiles as it were have the law written
upon their hearts and I think this will
be something that's very important when
we come to look at the Ten Commandments
and so on but yeah so that's another
echo of that notion of a Transcendent
good right exactly which in the context
of ancient near Eastern religion it's
difficult to uh difficult to sort of
exaggerate the point too much you know
it really is quite extraordinary to this
idea that there is a moral code that
cuts right across all tribes and All
Nations it's anthropologically absurd in
some sense because the anthropological
evidence suggests that we're pretty damn
tribal and that the fundamental human
response in some sense towards people
who aren't of your tribe is that they're
not human yeah yeah so it's really an
amazing Vision beyond the parochial
confines of well tribunation it's the
first real discovery that morality is a
possession that that all all human
beings have
and it's it's a it's a you know a
crucial point I mean people often say
that you know the code of amarabi and
that there are these sort of insights
into how other peoples and other tribes
are to be treated and an ethically a
responsible way
um but I think here it really is it's
it's it's a remarkable Insight the sort
of the the universalism the objectivity
of of moral values and to and to
Dennis's point the elevation of the
Foreigner to ethical status that
supersedes the ethical status of the
in-group ethnic member right amazing
thing that's an amazing thing it's very
hard to account for that and relative to
that Divine authorship it's very
interesting relative to that point that
we're talking about the midwives who
choose not to kill the children in the
case of the mother I just think this is
an amazing image I mean the mother can
only save her son by giving him up and
not only giving him up but actually
commending him to not simply the river
but to to I mean the anti-ethnic
character of what's going on here that
that somehow she must herself must
commend her own son to what you might
perceive of as the enemy well that is
what happens when you raise a child
though and especially true if you raise
the sun is because the sun has to move
Beyond you into the culture and if the
culture has a tyrannically patriarchal
element which would be the Egyptian
element let's say then in order to
Foster your son's development you have
to let the world take him and that would
even be the case if the broader social
world has that tyrannical proclivity and
if you don't do that you fail as a
mother though there's a deep sense in
which the maternal Instinct can only be
fulfilled by transcending itself and
that's what you see here that you can
only save the Sun by literally giving
him up yeah well that's a sacrifice of
the child Motif right so which is a very
difficult that's a very difficult idea
to come to terms with you see that in
the paella in some sense that great
Michelangelo statue where you see Mary
offering her broken son to the world and
that's what mothers do right that's what
they have to do I think that's
equivalent to the female crucifixion in
some real sense it's like you have to
allow your children you have to offer up
your children to be broken by the work
to the world broken by the world yeah so
and it came to pass in those days when
Moses was grown
that he went out into his Brethren
that'd be the Egypt or the Hebrews and
looked upon their burdens
and he spied an Egyptian smiting a
Hebrew one of his brethren
and he looked this way and that way
and when he saw that there was no man
around
he slew the Egyptian
and hid him in the sand
and when he went out the second day
behold two men of the Hebrews strove
together
and he said to him that did the wrong
wherefore Smite us thou thy fellow
and he said
who made you a prince and a judge over
us
intendeth thou to kill me as thou killst
the Egyptian
and Moses feared and said surely this
thing is known
now when Pharaoh heard this thing he
sought to slay Moses but Moses fled from
the face of pharah and pharaoh and dwelt
in the land of Midian and he sat down by
a well so back to the water imagery
there
I just want to say about this little
text this is actually one of my if I
have a little favorite text in in Exodus
it's this little text because it's a
little microcosm again of what's going
to happen because Moses has to do two
things he has to overthrow the Tyrant
and he has to he has to help the the
Hebrews become become something you have
to have to bring them together so that
they become a nation and it's like
that's right there he kills the Egyptian
and then he gets into because he doesn't
he's not in the right place like he does
it but then he gets in trouble and then
he comes to his wrong brothers and
they're like who who are you like who
made you King you know who made you our
chief and so he has to go through the
entire this whole process again to now
go up the mountain have this vision of
God even though he's fighting the Tyrant
he doesn't in caution and he's doing the
right he wants to do the right thing and
then It ultimately it's all going to
happen because when he sees God then he
receives from God that Authority
receives from God that that capacity to
then bring the law and then join and
create and not create but like
consolidate let's say the Hebrew people
into it right so the murderous impulse
which is which is generated by the the
moral revulsion against the slavery of
his people is Manifest in that careless
homicide and that just about Dooms Moses
and that would have doomed the entire
Enterprise
yeah well it's careless in that okay
that's a fine question it's careless in
that he it's only he presumes it's only
going to be successful if it's done in
secret and it's and it turns out not to
be secret it turns out to be revealed
and I think that's part of your point
isn't it unless I misunderstood it well
I mostly see it I mostly see it that
it's like a it's it's a messy version of
what he's actually going to do with the
proper Authority from God he doesn't yet
have the authority from God so he does
this thing he kills the Egyptian and
it's messy and then he tries to
reconcile his brothers and it's messy
and he has to flee he he doesn't have
what it takes to do it you know and so
he has to so you can think about it like
uh like in terms of your own bad habits
or whatever now you you can try to take
them on right you can try to change your
habits you can try to consolidate your
attention yeah good luck with that you
have to go through the desert like
there's a there's a there's a whole
process of prayer and purification that
you have to go through before you can
attend to those things if you try to
take on your own like tyrants just like
that good luck like they're going to
come back and and smash you down for the
job not yet that's right but Dennis you
said earlier though a couple of Levites
you know but don't you know Traditions
say that Levi was the one who you know
went out and slew the people who raped
his sister and he took things into his
own hand and the Messiah will come from
Judah and and and you know he went and
got a prostitute to his own
daughter-in-law
the the origins of Our Heroes or or look
at what David did and again to the
father of the Messiah the man not only
commits adultery that's pretty common
unfortunately because he has the man
killed to sleep with his wife uh
and that's by the way I I have zero
interest in in
bringing any politics into this so my
point is not political at all
uh but that was my argument with regard
to Donald Trump
the idea that because he is a man who
has committed many sins he is not an
appropriate leader has no biblical basis
we'd all be in trouble if the
precondition for for Action was
sinlessness that's that's clear yeah and
wasn't what what what was William
Blake's dictum wisdom through excess and
there's also ideas that are reflected in
the gospels too that there there's more
treasure and some some spiritual sense
heaped up by those who dare to sin and
and then are then repent and are
reclaimed than those who are too
terrified to take any action whatsoever
on the off chance that they might make a
mistake Christ says the same thing in
Revelation when he comes back as a judge
he says that his harshest judgment isn't
reserved for those who are hot or those
who are cold so the good or the evil for
that matter but for those who play both
ends against the middle and sit and sit
and never commit and so and that's
really an interesting idea right is that
in some real sense
God how at least how God's represented
in the Old Testament is definitely the
spirit on the side of the adventurous
for better for worse and that's quite
something right because it it also I
think Bears some
um light shed some light on this notion
of the terrifying element of the
Transcendent it's not whatever God's
goodness is it's not some simple
harmless
like all-encompassing weak compassion
it's it's something terrifying in its
moral breadth because it would really be
something if the spirit of God is on the
side of the
rampantly adventurous and I think you
can make a strong case for that at least
from within the confines of the biblical
Corpus
I mean Abraham's an adventurer Moses is
an adventurer Noah is an adventurer
these are people who David's an
adventurer they aren't people who stayed
home and
and tried to never cause any trouble
right which is a kind of emasculation in
and of itself
so well faith is Adventure
it's entrepreneurial I think people have
faith I call it the entrepreneurs of
life
and so why make the entrepreneurial
connection there's a vision there's a
venture there's a risk there's a cost
and the whole thing is wrapped up with
that well I think that it's lovely to
tie that in with faith too because in
our culture people often denigrate Faith
as belief in the unbelievable as if it's
a purely if it's first of all purely
propositional and second of all it's
just a denial of evidence you see that
in the atheist crowds constantly but to
me Faith is something like the
willingness to take a risk based on a
presumption and maybe the presumption is
well truth will set you free it's like
well tell the truth and see what happens
is it going to get you in a lot of
trouble the evidence that Aggregates
around you if you tell the truth to the
degree that you can isn't that this is
going to be the easy path forward you
have to decide this is something
Kierkegaard stressed right is that you
have to decide certain things as
preconditions for Action independent in
some real sense of the evidence and
that's the faith and this is when
Abraham for example in his great
adventure he goes he follows God's call
out of the safety of the tent the faith
is to heed the call of Adventure even
though he's got everything in some sense
that you need if you if you're only
interested in hedonistic gratification
but there's something beyond that and
it's faith that allows you to make those
decisions to step into the unknown
future and that's coming from Moses as
John was hinting I mean here he does it
himself who sets you up he did
and to take on Pharaoh by himself
right there's also though I think as I'm
going to argue I think there's a
profound sense in which Moses is a very
weak figure and in many respects if the
text is as it were about the revelation
of a kind of transcendent order in
history and about ours ourselves as
readers coming to understand ourselves
in that I mean I don't think we should
presume that somehow Moses are himself
is not a figure who needs that very
Revelation and to come into it himself
right and I think that you know that the
persistent imagery we're going to see
Moses here is actually a very weak and
doubtless and failing and so on so he's
unable to speak yes he is himself in
need of the that discovery of himself in
that Transcendent Revelation as anyone
else you see the transformation of Moses
although he does make that mistake you
see him move from a character who stands
no of hitting the rock the one mistake
it's like for Moses but he he goes from
this character who says God I can't
speak you know I I can't I can't speak
in front of people and then he he he
ends later as this shining figure that
comes down the mountain and people can't
even look on him because God says you
will be God for them and he has to hide
his face because he's so radiant and
it's like that transformation is
astounding it's such an interesting he
finishes with unstoppable words at the
end of Deuteronomy the man that couldn't
speak his very eloquent right well and
it it tells you something about what
constitutes the power of of true speech
and the notion there is something like
if the words are from god let's say it
doesn't matter how impaired you are in
your utterance of them that's a
secondary consideration and so it's it's
despite or maybe even because of your
insufficiency in some real sense if
you're oriented properly the words will
and I've met people like that who who
are not particularly articulate but
you listen to every word they say
because their words are very carefully
measured and chosen and often purchased
at the cost of plenty of suffering and
they just have that depth that's kind
that's uncanny in some real sense and
you call those people of genuine
character and you can certainly when
those people speak everyone is still and
that's really something it's really
something to see
by the way there's a very interesting
parallel since Abraham was raised we
know nothing absolutely nothing about
Abraham before God speaks to him but we
know a lot about Moses before God
chooses him
and there are three stories we've just
done too killing the Egyptian who was
beating a Hebrew
interfering in the in the fight of the
two Hebrews and now he will defend these
women who are not Hebrews against
non-hebrew uh male bullies
that's a remarkable man and in one case
he killed in one case he spoke and in
another case he just stood up
he is a very impressive man at this
point Moses and and we know no one is
going to ask gee why did God choose him
he's these are three impressive stories
right right so that they're all
elucidating different aspects of his
willingness to stand up against
terrorists irrespective of sex and
irrespective of nationality right okay
okay well and we come to that now now
the priest of Midian had seven daughters
and they came and Drew water and filled
the troughs to water their father's
flock and the Shepherds these bullies
that you talked about Dennis came and
drove them away and that's that's pretty
low way I mean you come across a bunch
of women trying to get some water and
and your your your manifestation of your
power is to chase them away how pathetic
but Moses stood up and helped them and
it does say Shepherds not Shepherd so
that means he's outnumbered and watered
their flock and when they came to rule
their father he said how is it that you
are come so soon today and they said
an Egyptian delivered us out of the hand
of the Shepherds that's an echoing
phrase right because that's another one
of these fractal prodroma because
the shepherds are bullying tyrants and
and Moses is the delivering is the
delivering Force there and they also
Drew water enough for us so that's a
reference to the pre-cosmogonic chaos
again that revivifies in the face of
tyranny and watered the flock amazing
imagery in that in that line and he said
unto his daughters
and where is he
why is it that you have left the man
call him that he may eat bread seems
like the right response and Moses was
content to dwell with the man and he
gave Moses zebra his daughter and she
bear him a son and he called his name
Gershon for he said I have been a
Stranger in a Strange Land
so that means Moses is a an obviously a
compelling enough character so that a
father is willing to marry his daughter
to him despite the fact that he's a
stranger and a foreigner so yeah and
there's also in this text like this
whole this whole meeting of the women at
the well is super important in terms of
understanding this relationship between
the the woman also and the well itself
as this water this this this potential
which which is the the positive aspect
of the the lower Waters you could say
and so that's why you see the Patriarchs
they always always meet their their
wives at Wells and ultimately in in
terms of Christianity that leads all the
way to the story of the Samaritan woman
at the well which is like the final
version of that where he meets this
strange woman and then you know she
offers him water he offers her like a
fountain that will
go into eternity and it's like this
relationship between the masculine and
The Feminine this is so old like it's
it's the the active Waters the the fresh
water than the salt water you see it in
like Mesopotamian myth like it's a super
old uh uh structure but it's it's it
yeah the water is revivifying right and
so and so are are water like ideas if
you're stuck in the desert of the
tyranny of your own mind then there are
certain ideas that strike you as
revivaling we talked about that in
relationship to the the Revelation that
you said it was odd and received right
and he's looking at tyranny right in the
face in the movie theater and a
revivifying idea strikes him and it has
this it has this ability to quench a
thirst that's much deeper than a mere
physical thirst and a symbolic analog
too thirst quenching and often provided
by women with their animating Spirit
right so
and it came to pass in process of time
that the king of Egypt died
and the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage that's a very
useful line too because we see here too
that not only is it wrong for the
Egyptians to enslave the Israelites but
it's correct for the Israelites to
grieve because they're not free and so
what we see implicit in the narrative
here is this constant insistence that
those who wrestle with God that's Israel
should be free that that's a higher
moral good and you might say well that's
self-evident as we discussed earlier but
it's not even the Israelites themselves
when they end up in the desert and in
the other terrible places they're
wandering takes them to a lot of them
Pine for the days of the their
subjugation to tyranny and if you know
anything about Nostalgia for Stalin in
in the former Soviet Union for example
or the or the continual
current extent worship of Mao you can
understand this I read a book at one
point that was written by concentration
camp guards who were nostalgic for the
work that they did in the concentration
camps in Germany and so don't be
thinking that people believe without
constraint that freedom and absence of
slavery is a positive good they can be
afraid of that that necessity
for faith that that entrepreneurial
Spirit demands they'd rather take
the brick walls and and the certainty so
it came to pass in the process of time
that the king of Egypt died and the
children of Israel sighed by reason of
the bondage and they cried
and the Cry came up to
and their Cry came up unto God
by reason of the bondage so God is
represented here as the superordinate
spirit who responds to the cries of the
unjustly enslaved and whatever else he
might be that's what he is and God heard
their groaning
and God remembered his Covenant with
Abraham with Isaac and with Jacob
and God looked upon the children of
Israel and God had respect unto them you
as Covenant is an idea that you're very
interested in and so
what do you think it means here that
it's such a strange line a that God
remembered his Covenant why would God
have to he's God why does he have to
remember did he forget like what's no
but this is the first time God enters
the story as an agent
he knows he is he remembers he cares and
I love Rabbi heshel saying here he
Compares Yahweh with you know the Greek
understanding and the Greek
understanding say Aristotle God is an
unmoved mover
no heshall said he is the most moved
mover
he hears and remembers and here he's
keeping his promise that's the
significance he's made the the promise
to Abraham you can see that this is
something that we commune with if people
are grieving their enslavement even to
themselves
if there is the possibility that they
can be freed from that there has to be
the possibility that there's something
that they can call on outside the
tyranny of their own imagination to free
them so because otherwise it's like in
the scientific realm if you you have
your epistemological ideas your theory
about the world but you presume that
there's a corrective object outside of
that that can tell you when you've made
an error there's something outside your
theory and if you're ensconced in your
own tyranny there is no Redemption from
that unless there's something that
transcends even your own tyranny within
you that you can in some real sense call
on and I do think people call them that
all the time Carl Rogers when he talked
about the pre preconditions for
therapeutic Improvement and this has to
do with the notion of humility is that
if your client
isn't
desperate and ready to change themselves
there isn't really anything you can do
about that as a therapist they have to
have already admitted to themselves that
they're laboring under the burden of
their own even unrealized tyranny and
then open themselves up to the
possibility that there's an alternative
pathway forward and that is that is
that's an action of faith and it is an
opening up to Revelation and I think you
can think that as a secular person it's
like well
if you're troubled but you can improve
part of the way you improve is like the
scientist who's open to New Revelations
by the object is to open yourself up to
the idea that there's something beyond
your current solipsistic misery and I
cannot see how that's not both prayer
and a statement of faith
no absolutely Dennis isn't their
understanding though that the Jews at
this time had lost much of their touch
with the Lord altogether
what is that we we don't know it from
the text so
I I agree with you that would
I mean what would they remember for 400
years or whatever the time span it's not
completely precise of the time in Egypt
that's why Moses as we'll see obviously
says well what what name do I do I give
what I what I go to them and say I came
in so-and-so's name so if they had
remembered the name he he would not have
asked that question
right so they're so diverse from their
tradition that he can't even speak in
the name of the tradition right right
which is definitely a problem that but
faith has to begin when we get to the
end of ourselves
and reach out and obviously they got so
out of touch that they needed to cry out
and this cry is an incredibly important
triggering moment isn't it by the way I
I use this because I also wrote a
commentary on the haggata the the
Passover seder service
and I said so there were very four
famous questions children ask at the
Seder so I said here's a question for
adults to ask if God took the Jews out
of Egypt why didn't he take them out of
Europe
and in some configuration I mean almost
any Jew has asked that question
and I just among other things I I don't
have a perfect answer by any means but I
there is an implied answer
one could have asked the same question
in Egypt why did God wait so long how
many Jews were killed and beaten and
tortured until God quote unquote
remembered
so
well maybe the cry is it is it partly
the possibility that
like man
man has to reach up to God just as much
as God reaches down and then without
Moses being there as the precondition
for in some sense for God's intervention
then it's not going to occur right but
that doesn't put God off the hook I'm
asking a question that puts God on the
hook right right no so my my answer and
it's not emotionally satisfying but I
find it theologically satisfying is that
God does not save the individual Jew he
saves the Jewish people
yeah well I wonder a because
I'm not I'm not denying at all the
validity of what you said but you know
it's it seems to be the case in the
biblical narrative that God portions out
a pretty major responsibility and
catastrophe for mankind and that's to
live ethically despite mortality and
limitation it's a really heavy burden
and so then you wonder it's like well
just exactly how much are we called on
to be ethical actors so that God's
goodness can be revealed and that's real
open question and you know I mean when
when when when uh in Sodom and Gomorrah
when the search is on for one or two
good men in the city so that it's not
going to be destroyed the the idea there
is that even if there's one person who's
good we won't destroy the city it goes
down to 10. okay no no that's important
one dozen suffice
okay but there isn't there is a yes
there's a there's a notion there that
it's the outlier that saves every
civilization right it is the great
lesson of our time you're an outlier
it's not it's not even it's a statement
of fact not even a compliment it is a
compliment but it's not meant to such
outliers do all the good that is done
some outliers do evil but all the good
that is done is done by outliers well
and that's the tension between the law
and the pro the law when it becomes
corrupt and the prophetic tradition that
Echoes through the Old Testament and
then up into the New Testament too
because the law
from a tradition perspective turns into
various shades of Egypt and then it's
always a prophetic figure that comes up
and shakes his fist and and right in the
face of the king that happens most
particularly in the case of David right
when he's called on his sins because he
takes Bathsheba which is a really low
act right I mean he sees this woman
bathing naked on the roof of a nearby
house and then he sends her husband
who's a great General into battle to
have him killed it's like that's pretty
damn twisted and pathetic and and then
one of the prophets whose name I don't
remember at the moment calls him on it
it's Nathan is it Nathan yeah which is
pretty brave right I mean he's a he's a
Mideast potentate you don't just walk
into his castle and tell him that he's
cursed by God with without some fear for
your neck and so and you see this just
continually this dichotomy between the
corruption of tradition and the
emergence of a prophetic figure who's in
principle has has this inspiration from
God and and the weight of his words is
what indicates that that's the case very
Dennis you didn't quite say it and I
would never dare say it as a Christian
but I've heard Jews say that one reason
for the answer question you raised was
the Israel
and Israel is now a nation recognized by
the world
I've heard it all of my life and I and I
have to say
that it depicts God to my way of
thinking in an awful way the ends don't
justify them well the ends do sometimes
justify means but yes we we murdered a
million Jewish babies and we tortured
and humiliated and degraded five million
others in order to produce Israel
i i as a Jew would say I think I'm going
to opt for another group yeah yeah
that's not the God that I understand
yeah that's Ivan's comment in the
brothers karamazov too when he takes on
eliosha you know he said you the the his
point in some sense he talks about this
girl who's frozen to death by her
parents as she's screaming in an
outhouse which is a story that
Dostoevsky took from the news it's
actually happened so she screamed all
night froze to death and Ivan says he
can't believe in a God that would allow
that to happen even once no matter what
the reason was well that that's not what
I'm saying I believe in a God who allows
evil to happen that's not what you were
challenging God created the evil to do
the good of the creation of Israel that
I I don't accept that God allows evil is
a given yeah well it's a it's a
consequence of of Free Will yes exactly
yes I think I thought about that a lot
too because you can imagine a world
imagine a world that's the best world
possible just as a as a game in some
sense not that we can really do that but
then you might ask yourself
is a world where you could choose evil
but choose not to better than a world
where you're a robot who has no choice
and I think the answer to that I mean if
you think about your own children you
want this vast expanse of possibility
for them and the vast or that expansive
possibility the more real the
possibility of evil choices is but what
they get out of that is the benefit of
the actual choice so they have a real
Destiny right they're wrestling with
real things and they can choose not to
engage in evil so it could be not there
although it's but if it's going to exist
in real possibility it also has to be an
actualizable possibility and so it could
be that a world where evil is possible
but they're not chosen is better than a
world where even doesn't exist at all
that's why I've always been
suspicious of people saying about a dog
such a good dog
has he chosen his goodness
yeah surely a world of which there's a
possibility of doing good and bringing
about generating value is is a world
that is that is better than a world in
which that's simply not possible at all
well that that's the question isn't it
that's and in some sense that's the
fundamental question because it's one
thing to wrestle with the reality of
tragedy but it's a whole different thing
to wrestle with the reality of
malevolence and you might say well why
would God create a world where the snake
in the garden let's say uh why would God
allow a world where evil existed to
exist as a possibility and it could be
easily that
the good that is there as a consequence
of the breadth of possibility supersedes
the evil of the of the possibility of
malevolence plus it also gives people
some real thing to wrestle with right is
that whatever human beings are we have a
heavy load it's it's a load that in
Christianity is associated in some sense
with divinity right because God becomes
mortal man and so it's a real what we're
contending with is is real in the most
fundamental sense and that means it's
not trivial we can get into real trouble
and of course the Holocaust that was
real trouble and and so that's also it's
a very peculiar idea but it's also some
evidence of the
I don't know respect
that
whatever created us has for us that we
actually have a real Destiny and in the
broadest possible sense
I suppose you can you can say that it's
simply it's just not possible to bring
about a world in which benevolence is
possible where there isn't a genuine
risk of malevolence as well well maybe
it's not possible it may be but so then
you might think that the optimal
solution is where great evil is possible
but freely rejected and that would be
the best of all possible worlds and I do
believe that's the case and I certainly
see this is part of the jungian idea of
incorporating the shadow I suppose which
is also that this capacity that we have
within us which is a predatory capacity
this capacity for great evil and for
brutality and and for strength all of
that makes us much more than we would be
if we can harness that for good then we
would be if we were just harmless
rabbits for example you know not to
denigrate rabbits they're perfectly
lovely but but you get that you get the
picture and the best people I know have
been the people who you know have
absolute capacity for Mayhem if
Unleashed but choose no not to unleash
in fact to harness it for purposes of
the good
so
now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his
father-in-law the priest of Midian
another indication of him being
subservient to an ethical structure
outside both Egyptian and the Hebrew
structure there because he's serving
this priest of Midian and tending his
flock very that oh that also makes Moses
a figure that transcends the parochial
confines of his culture another
indication of that and he led the flock
to the back side of the desert and came
to the Mountain of God
even to Horeb and so God here is
associated with the mountain and so you
can Riff on that and the angel of the
Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire
this compelling and attractive phenomena
fire phenomenon out of the midst of a
bush and he looked and behold the bush
burned with fire and the Bush was not
consumed
that's the symbol Jews often use for the
Jewish people where I always burned but
were not consumed
yeah when the question is in this
situation like that just exactly what's
being burned away
you know I mean one of the reasons that
the Transcendent is terrifying and why
people purified themselves for example
before they engaged in psychedelic
experiences historically was because if
they got too close to the fire
the burning that that produced was so
intense that it might be of mortal
danger you know if you're 95 dead wood
and you get too close to the fire all
that dead wood should go but it might be
fatal
so you were mentioning the whole heroic
side of Faith or I think you were in
fact
um there's also this
terrifying aspect of the deity linked to
Transcendence and the absoluteness the
mysterium tremendous
as Auto described it this this
um
this mystery that is both repelling
because it's terrifying and at the same
time attractive
um and I think that that that was well
we get some Echoes of that I would say
in in contact with things of great
Beauty the European Cathedrals are like
that they're I was in one in Vienna
recently
that had three floors of of plague bones
underneath it and so it's This
Magnificent structure too much really
when when you walk in and it's
overwhelming in its power and to see
that you know people sacrificed hundreds
of years of effort under conditions of
extreme privation to build these
magnificent buildings and then to go
underneath and see the layers and layers
and layers of catastrophe and death that
that's been erected on it's it's too
much right it's it's just too much and
that's just an echo of what is too much
in the most fundamentally absolute sense
it's just a pointer in that direction
people are terrified of Beauty for the
same reason you know I've watched people
respond to Art I had a lot of paintings
in my house at one point
they're all coming back now like 300 of
them you know it was just paintings
everywhere and people would come in and
say well why would you want to live in a
museum and I'd think well that's exactly
where I want to live why would you not
want to live but it was too much the
paintings a lot of them were paintings
of warfare scenes and like it they were
beautiful but in this
but they weren't nice it wasn't elevator
music you know and you look at those
things and and they
they Shake all the weakness off of you
if you look at them long enough and
that's very frightening especially if
there's lots of weakness and there
definitely is so it's interesting they
notice in our culture where you might
say there's been a systematic
ideological process of desecration that
there's also been an aversion to Beauty
yeah I mean that's not accidental the
philosopher Roger scrutin generica right
the spread of they are exactly the
spread of these cookie cutter suburbs
everywhere that have this incredibly
they're efficient in some sense and
they're convenient but they're just
hideous and they have this very
short-term element and yeah and you see
this contempt for that too it's really
terrifying to see it in in Europe
because as a North American especially
Canadian going to Europe has this
element of pilgrimage to beauty and you
go I saw this in Edinburgh in particular
although they're fixing it Edinburgh the
whole downtown core one square miles the
UNESCO world heritage site and no wonder
because Edinburgh like it's beautiful
and then intermingled with these mostly
Victorian buildings if I remember
correctly were these hideous
catastrophes erected in the 1970s this
brutalist
modernist
abortion this these giant middle fingers
you know to the entire context and to
their credit the people of Edinburgh are
tearing them down and my mentor Peter
burga has a notion signals of
transcendence some are positive beauty
or cslow's surprised by Joy some are
negative like the olden one
this to me is the ultimate signal the
Transcendence ever because if you look
at Burning it must end in ashes
can you think about look away from fire
either like
you can't step in the same river twice
you just go that way you'd end up with a
Hindu view of Maya and the world's
unreal and yet no here's something
burning but not burned up right that's
us man well no no there's something
Beyond us and and he's arrested
he sees it and then he seeks for the
explanation and immediately he
encounters the Lord and that's why
Dennis you're the Jews themselves are
the ultimate because of your survival
despite persecution despite you
shouldn't be here
some some shouldn't
just forgive me forgive me
I'm thinking of Trotsky and the like I
just
there so yeah well to jump unimpressive
dudes to jump from the hip right to to
the Hellenic that's not far off the way
Plato uses the image of fire in his
famous image of the cave in book Seven
of of the Republic you know the Flames
are flickering but that's not all there
is there's Transcendence Beyond there's
the sunlight the stable Timeless
sunlight outside the cave which the sort
of chaotic fire of the sensory world and
the fickle world the ever-changing world
is it but it's a it's a signal of
transcendence as Burger puts it
and it's it's an interesting interesting
sort of consonance there well fire fire
is also this mysterium tremendous
tremendous that you described because I
think biologically and I'll think about
this from an evolutionary perspective
we're all descendants of the first
proto-human chimpanzee analog who
absolutely 100 percent could not stop
looking at fire right and fire is
absolutely fascinating to human beings
it's so interesting to watch people
around the campfire for example where we
feel at home we gaze into the fire and
the fire seems to me to be something
that escapes what's called latent
inhibition is that almost everything we
see after we've seen it multiple times
we see as a representation of memory we
don't see the thing itself but fire is
one of those things that escapes that
and we see fire as something that's
constantly new plus it's always
constantly changing and we cannot look
away from it just like we can't look
away from little children and we can't
look away from sexual Beauty these
things all escape the tyranny of our
conceptualization so I just wanted to
say something about these two to me when
these these two texts when you weared
before in this one is really one of the
most a very beautiful description of
reality based a little bit on what you
were saying before because you have it
says and God heard the groaning and
remembered his Covenant with Abraham
with Isaac and with Jacob first of all
this is also referring to Genesis at the
end of the flood because that's what the
flood ends the flood ends it says God
remembered Noah and when God remembers
Noah the waters recede and then the the
dove finds the Tree finds the structure
that's that that connects Heaven and
Earth that's that's what the the the
dove finds and so you have this verse
but right there it says he remembered
his Covenant with Abraham Isaac and
Jacob and for the first time you have
this hierarchy again coming back saying
he's God is already giving back the
identity to his people he's already
saying it's like there's the it's not
just God and Chaos it's there's this
whole story that's there and he's and
he's he's going to give it back to to to
his people and then when you when Moses
so is that Jacob's Ladder do you think
is that definitely true it's definitely
Jacob's Ladder the mountain and the
Tabernacle itself when we get the
Tabernacle the sea it's a representation
of Moses his Mountain itself or the
mountain of paradise itself so then
Moses
right after that you have Moses what
happens he comes out of the desert
come to a mountain and in that mountain
now he sees this flaming Bush he has to
remove his sandals he enters into the
Sacred Space the Sacred Space is
the the the text at least I know San
Gregory Nisa really insists on how the
bush is a Bramble Bush it's a thorn bush
and and that's the you can see that's
the fullness of everything because the
Thorns are the consequence of the foe
the Thorns are what God gives us the
consequence of sin and now here is this
thorn bush which is full of light but is
not consumed and that's the thing that's
what God gives us it's like reality can
exist in all its multiplicity knowledge
Beauty and we don't as Christians and
people also in the Hebrew tradition we
don't have this idea that the world is
an illusion that the world is just just
has to be gotten rid of and we just need
to get to the to Nirvana or whatever we
have the sense that the world is full of
of God's presence and it's a gift right
it's good that's what it says at the
beginning of Genesis I think that that's
what we're seeing here is this this this
this God is present in the world God is
manifesting himself to Moses but he's
not consuming it it's it's continuously
continuing to exist in its even in its
participation in God now I've read that
the uh so Moses has to take his sandals
off to go to to do this I read that
that's also his and this is on
commentary on the Torah that he was
forgo any claim to ownership of the land
on upon which he stood there were there
were ancient Hebrew Traditions about
taking ownership of land that had to do
with being shawed and so to take off the
shoes meant to approach the Transcendent
in a humble way with no claim to
possession and that that seems to me and
the shoes of course are symbols of
identity Tammy my wife she had dreams
all the time where shoes represent her
current identity and so
all right and the angel of Lord appeared
to him in a flame of fire out of the
midst of a bush and he looked and behold
the bush burned with fire and the Bush
was not consumed this is at least a
great mystery and Moses said I will now
turn aside and see this great sight why
the bush is not burnt
and when the Lord saw that he turned
aside to see God called him unto him out
of the midst of the Bush and said Moses
Moses and Moses said here am I
and he said draw not nigh hi hither put
off thy shoes from off thy feet for the
place where the only redundancy in God's
entire dialogue in the Bible
is take your shoes off your feet
meaningless point but I just I've always
gotten a kick out of it where are else
are your shoes if not on your feet
is that in the Hebrew yes yes it struck
me as a kid where else are his shoes
well also it also it also means well it
also means I think that that God is
insisting that in some real sense Moses
stands unprotected and naked in front of
him and and because to take off your
shoes is and to reveal your feet that
might account for why that emphasis is
there right right and so it's defeat and
not the shoes and the shoes are
definitely I mean they're a fundamental
element of culture they Shield us from
our contact with the ground but they
also in some real sense Elevate us above
the ground right that's the danger of
shoes we're no longer in contact with
the Earth there's a there's a lack of
humility by putting on that those
garments of skin and we feel
I think the best way to understand this
taxes as a Return to Eden and so in
order to Return to Eden right he has to
remove his garments of skin and it's
like but what's crazy is the surprise is
like he removes his guards the skin of
the surprise is to see the thorn bush in
flame it's like what a crazy mystery
like what a well and it okay well that's
an echo then too of the notion that in
order to encounter the Transcendent in
the most real sense you have to
absolutely and 100 percent accept your
naked vulnerability and you think well
that's self-evident when you think it
through because how else could you adapt
to life
in the most fundamental sense without
simultaneously accepting the fact that
you're ultimately right naked and
vulnerable You're ultimately that
because you're prone to Insanity you're
prone to tyranny and you're prone to
death that's there isn't any more
ultimate on the human plane than that
and so if you can't adapt to that and
accept it then you can't adapt to or
accept life
so you think that's a big reason any of
you why so many people have rejected God
they're not prepared to accept their
vulnerability
oh I don't know I'm truly asking I I had
not thought of it in this way well I
think that I think that the rejection in
some sense of the travails of the Saints
and the prophets and the and the
crucifix is definitely its rejection of
the catastrophe of mortality
because all of those Traditions call on
us and and you see this as a clinician
one of the things that clinicians
learned across all the different schools
of Clinical Psychology was that
the more radically you accept the
necessity of confronting what you're
terrified of and wish to avoid the
higher the probability that you'll move
forward and recover and we don't know
the limit to that
right and the Christian question in some
real sense is the limit to that it's
like well how deep into the abyss do you
have to look
and the answer is
not only into death but beyond death
into hell
because if death is what terrifies you
the most you know nothing about hell
because there are many things worse than
death
and so the call is to gaze into the
abyss as far down as as it goes and
that's all the way to the bottom about
basic state of vulnerability of
fragility it does conjure up a sense of
finitude I think in in The Human
Experience finitutes and and dependence
and and a sense of a sense of lack a
sense that we are not in the end Masters
and captains of our soul that we require
some other an orientation to something
greater something on on which we do
depend yeah absolutely and also I think
we have a particular crisis at the
moment I think we can see this in the
universities with the so-called Mental
Health crisis and it's linked to this
assumption that
human beings should be happy and if
they're not there's something wrong with
them and and our ancestors uh grew up
with the tenet that life is extremely
difficult and that the a path to
happiness is is extremely demanding and
also unbelievably unlikely right and you
should be grateful when it comes along
but by no means expect it and then they
had a noble Vision too on the Roman and
the Greek and the Hebrew front which was
not so much hedonic happiness which is
very trivial and solution says well that
disappears when you first hear the boots
kicking down your door at three in the
morning it's like so much for happiness
that's gone and then what do you have
and well that was Frankel's question so
Nixon's question and and part of the
answer to that is
in the face of privation and Terror and
tragedy and malevolence you have the
Great Adventure of your life and one of
the things that I think is true is that
you find that Adventure in truth because
truth is an adventure and it might be
enough of an adventure it might be
enough of an adventure to justify the
catastrophe and malevolence of life and
I wonder whether the erosion of certain
basic rituals is also generating a lot
of problems I mean a trivialid about not
trivial example but but uh
uh uh and one that comes to my mind was
a death in college about 20 years ago of
a uh a brilliant young student uh who
was hit by a car crossing the road uh in
the college and
the I I noticed that the students the 18
19 year old students were completely
thrown by this and partly it emerged
they hadn't been to funerals their
parents hadn't taken them along to
shelter them to protect them from
suffering and they'd say as good parents
they would not allow their children to
be subjected to funerals as if the
funerals might be damaging them now what
I noticed was in fact that you had
adults I mean young adults highly
intelligent adults who were completely
disorientated and distraught by death
and I I think to some extent because the
rituals yeah well there's no container
for it well my wife remembers when she
was five her grandfather died and they
didn't take her to the funeral now my
wife's parents by the way were very good
at fostering Independence but they
didn't take her to the funeral and she's
she was shocked by that and never forgot
it and I think the reason was is that
the message there is that
death itself is so terrifying that
there's no way a child can
apprehend it or bear up under it and
that better not be the case because
that's life death and so if that's the
case then life is too much
and so what you do is you bring the
child to the funeral to show that so
when my wife's mother died we were there
for her death
and uh it was terrible death she had a
neurological disease a degenerative
neurological disease a dementia so it
went she deteriorated over about 15
years and first of all her husband Rose
to the challenge man it was something to
see because he was sort of a man about
town but when the chips were down God he
was there and it was something man and
then I watched her family deal with this
they're pretty tough my wife's sister is
a palliative care nurse and other
sisters a pharmacist and they've they've
confronted mortality you know in a noble
sense and what happened in that family
was that as they mutually faced death
together and this is also what you do at
a funeral is the the bonds that attach
them to each other grew stronger and
thicker and so that well they suffered
the loss of their mother which was a
genuine loss they were compensated for
it in a real sense by the increase in
love between them and I would say
their family in the aftermath of their
mother's death death was much closer and
tighter than it was before and you know
you can't say well that made it good
because that's a cheap out you know but
you can bloody well say that it made it
a lot less like hell than it had to be
and so these containing rituals your
children are a lot tougher than people
think and you need to take them to a
funeral so that they can see that the
adults
I'm going to be like Dad and look he can
stand up in the face of death maybe even
in the face of the death of his father
and he can still move forward and God
you better learn that because it's
coming down the pipelines but the text
is I mean the text is this text is
precisely such a ritual right I mean
this isn't a live stream of History
right this is a text written to convey
you might say the order in history or
Gods the Transcendent order in history
and to bring us into that history and so
you know when you talk about the the
ritual of the funeral for example that's
a ritual to help you understand the
horror of death and to in some sense
redeem it at least from the point of
view of your own self-consciousness to
be able to understand it and so I think
you know when when we're when you see
these moments that refer to God
remembering his Covenant and so on this
is
this is in a way showing us that the the
text is itself a liturgical
creation of our own subjectivity our own
memories such that we can make sense of
our lives here and now well I just want
to ask Jordan a question you're it
intrigued me what you said about your
mother's father
he really it was a volvy ball and then
Rose to the challenge so I want to ask
you a question
prior to the challenge would be what
would you have predicted his behavior
would have been
well I always liked him and admired him
but he was a man about town you know
extroverted guy so I I I had to pass the
test and and you would have predicted he
would have passed the test not to the
degree that he did it was right so
here's my question and it's really uh I
I wrestled with it I don't have an
answer I'm curious to hear anyone on
this
do we know people before they have been
tested no not really so we don't know
ourselves either and this is a very very
interesting uh question
because
life in America at least from World War
II to the last till 2010 even years ago
was quite easy for the vast majority of
its citizens by any reasonable history
exactly yeah Butch is the only standard
obviously so
it's is it fair to say we don't know the
moral caliber of most of the people
living in America because the the I
think people have been tested in the
last two years and I think half of my
fellow citizens failed dismally
especially doctors I might add
and uh
Hemingway who said that every generation
needs a war to sort out what's important
and well it's a very dark thought yes
well it's more maybe while William James
would have said something like a war or
its moral equivalent
and and that was something James
yeah well because you have to well
that's what I'm referring to it's yeah
exactly yeah exactly so it's interesting
do do we even know ourselves till we're
tested I don't I don't think so well I
think you can make a case for this
biologically here's here's a case this
is quite interesting so you might ask
why do you grow when you go somewhere
new and there's two answers to that one
is you go there and you you gather more
information you talk to new people you
see new things and so you can think
about that as a constructivist response
right your your Web of Knowledge
adaptive knowledge increases because
you've been more places but that's not
all that happens
if you go somewhere new
and you expose yourself to a challenge
then new genes the genes that haven't
turned on to encode certain proteins
turn on and they flesh out your
the your psychophysiological structure
and you could even imagine imagine that
you decided to take on a new challenge
voluntarily so that'd be part of the
heroic Journey then your bio biology is
going to respond to that right down to
the genetic level and it's going to
reveal new potential that's coded inside
the genetic structure that's going to
make you literally more than you are and
there's this idea that Jung talked about
in relationship to the
um the maze in the shark Cathedral so
imagine you go into this Maze and then
you walk the four quadrants
and then you come to the center and the
four quadrants are the four corners of
the world and you have to pass through
all the four corners of the world before
you come to the center and the idea
there is that you have to hit yourself
against all the sharp edges of the world
before the full potential of what you
are is Manifest and that well that has
something to do I would say also with
the idea of the harrowing of hell is
that you have to face death and you have
to face tyranny and you have to face
malevolence and so that's hell at that
point and the deeper you
peer into that abyss and the more
strenuously you wrestle without the more
of you turns on
and so and I think that's
I think that's how and then you also
think well how could it be any other way
why would what was within you manifest
itself fully in the absence of challenge
nothing works that way you don't get
stronger without lifting weights so then
that leads to another question
how many people putting aside an easy
Society how many people lead a life
devoid of challenges
well pretty pretty small they just don't
they don't acknowledge that them as
challenges and therefore don't need to
pass the test well or they're they're
resentful and bitter about their
problems
and opportunities the age we live in
yeah if I'm challenged it's it's the
fault of someone yeah well and people
are enticed to believe that but what
I've been so hardened by and one of the
things that people have been responding
to in relationship to what I've been
lecturing about as a clinician I would
say is when you confront young people
this is especially being true of young
men with the notion that what they
should do is
strive to Bear up underneath the
heaviest responsibility they can
shoulder voluntarily they're
unbelievably receptive to that idea and
and and and it's so interesting to watch
because it's almost as if all you have
to do is introduce the idea assuming
you're vaguely credible all you have to
do is introduce the idea and it's like
it's like a crystal in the in a
supersaturated solution it just goes no
one ever told me that and one of the
things that's been deeply sorrowful for
me is to see how much effect those ideas
have on people how quickly and the
reason it's sorrowful is because you
simultaneously see how much of a lack
there is of that idea in our current
culture
so but I think people are there for the
call man and lots of them especially
young people on that sort of cusp of
Messianic development in late
adolescence you know when the when the
radicals can get a hold of them and make
them resentful and bitter if you offer a
better pathway forward which is
something like bear up voluntarily under
the catastrophe of life because you have
something to offer right that's there's
this idea and the biblical idea that
in in some sense God says this I think
he says it to Moses later that
maybe it's in the gospels that it's
required that all of the ramifications
of the law manifest themselves it's like
a holy requirement and the idea there is
something like
and this is a really
terrifying metaphysical idea it's like
why is there suffering in the world why
is there malevolence in the world well
maybe it's because we're not all we
could be and maybe it's incumbent on
each of us and I really mean each of us
to reveal everything that is within us
and if we revealed everything that was
within us and that would happen as a
consequence of this voluntary ethical
striving if we revealed everything
within us God only knows how much hell
we could dispense with because we have
no idea what things could be like if
everyone was 100 percent aiming up
this might be forgive me for I just want
to say this is so important I think
uh
so
I remember in high school I started an
anti-cheebing campaign in my in my grade
and I remember
vividly the this is really triggering
things at me
the biggest reason I I did I had I had
cheated on some tests in elementary
school
and but the biggest reason I I didn't in
high school was
not
God was not particularly involved in my
decision which he would have been more
so later in moral decisions
I I wanted to pass the test of not
cheating right right I'm I'm just
thinking literally for the first time
maybe that's another good method of
getting people to do what is good past
tests
past challenges yeah well you know there
is speculation you know there's this
obviously this this scene in job where
God Bets with the devil which is a hell
of a thing to do it's like you're gonna
bet with the devil and the idea is that
you can tempt job out of his moral
position and what's God up to and I had
a vision about that at one time about
God
presenting man with a with the most
vicious adversary possible and you might
think well why would someone do that and
the answer is something like well
if you know that
The Entity that you're setting the
forces of Hell against in some real
sense can triumph over that then the
positioning of the adversary is actually
a call to a greater good and I think
I I can't help but think that that's
correct because I can't see how what is
best can be called out of us without us
being confronted simultaneously by what
is worse worst
but I hope I'm not being pasted by
saying that's important but it's a kind
of mid-level
test of growth so you've mentioned
responsibility or reaching our full
potential of Who We Are
you can do that in various ways but many
of them are truly some self-help goes
some way towards that I think what you
see here the call of Moses or the call
of Abraham or the call of lots of people
in the scripture the highest
responsibility of all is responding in
faith to God's calls right by definition
by definition the highest fulfillment I
actually dislike my own name intensely
but I was named after a writer
whose most famous book is called My
Utmost
for His Highest right right right and
that's right well that's the problem of
the church that's calling right I don't
think this anyhow you write a book on
calling any higher version of that well
and here's some here's something that's
relevant to that too so I know neural
pharmacologically
I studied
pleasure as a biological mechanism and
the intense pleasure that's associated
with joy and enthusiasm so enthusiasm is
to be filled with God Theos and Theos
it's so it's to be filled with the
spirit of God you do not experience joy
as a consequence of achieving a goal you
experience joy as a consequence of
positing a goal and then noting progress
towards the goal and so a corollary of
that is that the higher the goal
the more intense The Joy attendant on
observation of progress towards it and
so then you might say if you wanted to
maximize the possibility of hedonic
expression not not to degenerate into a
cheap Hedonism but to maximize it in the
most real sense and this is a Victor
Frankl idea in some fundamental senses
you pick the most noble possible goal
and that is that's the mountain that
service to God again by definition right
because it's service to the highest
thing whatever that is and then that
opens the door that doesn't literally
open the door to the it's a precondition
for the experience of joy and so these
people who are depressed and anxious and
miserable part of the reason for that is
that their their ethic is scattered
their goals are diverse and low level
there's nothing beckoning in the
distance and so they can't see progress
because there's no progress and
certainly not progress to assert
superordinate goal so there's actually
no positive emotion and that's
technically the case because the
positive a motion system is a
calibration system that produces
navigation orientation towards
destination Point that's literally how
it functions so I think you just
described the whole book of Exodus just
right there like that's right really
what Exodus is right well that's the
scattered mixed multitude that is
gathered into uh and it can experience
that in yourself as much as in the
people or anything actually functions
that way you can identify whether
there's no vision of people parachutes
are the cultural norms are so well it's
overrated it's also the danger of
dispensing with an ideal you know
because the problem with ideals is that
I every ideal is a judge so the ideal of
beauty is a judge because who of us
compares to the ideal beauty and the
answer is no one and we all know it and
so the ideal is the catastrophe in that
sense the Raging Fire that can consume
you yes exactly exactly but if there's
no ideal there's no goal and if there's
no well then there's no joy and so so
what are we going to do we're going to
dispense with our ideals so so we don't
hurt anybody's feelings and what we're
going to dispense well that's exactly
what we're being called upon to do and
so we're going to abandon joy and you do
unless you have the the ultimately
judgmental ideal it's so perverse unless
you have the ultimately judgmental ideal
there's no precondition for joy
go back to Stephen's thing about the
funeral and the reality which the
history and I was psychology and lots of
things you can throw incredible
interpretive light
but the highest thing here is that God
is the actor in this and it happens in
history
so the surrounding Nations all their
festivals were festivals of nature
spring and so on
the Jewish festivals are festivals of
history
and they're taught to follow them as if
they were there maybe centuries later in
other words we've got to keep always
that history is
the decisive thing here and in light of
History you bring in Psychology I happen
to be trained sociology bring it in but
history and meeting God you're into
pretty heavy philosophy yeah you see
here too that what's put in the highest
place which is so fascinating is the
spirit that calls you to Freedom out of
tyranny right as we said before even if
it calls you into the desert to begin
with and so it's quite the
conceptualization of God is that part of
whatever is to be properly put in the
highest place is exactly the spirit that
calls you out of tyranny and so all
right well let's finish off this chapter
and and he said
draw not nigh hi hither
this is God talking put off thy shoes
from off thy feet for the place where on
thou standest is Holy Ground
again I'm reminded of the fact that this
is likely something like a call to
humility I was looking at The Sermon on
the Mount the other day and Christ says
in The Sermon on the Mount that those
who are poor in spirit are blessed
there's many people who are blessed but
the poor in spirit are blessed and the
question is what does that mean
and it means something like those who
have been brought low enough to be
humble enough to be ready to receive and
I think that's what's being echoed here
is that that's part of the reflection of
Moses the explanation I ever heard well
thank you thank you it took me only 40
years to think about it that that really
helps because I've never thought oh the
poor are so special they're yeah
it's definitely a reference to Pride the
poor in spirit are not prideful and
narcissistic I looked in Bible Hub which
is a great site you can see 50
translations simultaneously and so you
get the full connotation of the phrase
and if you look at all the different
translations you can see that it's
definitely it's definitely a call to
this this particular kind of humility
because one of the things I learned when
I was teaching my course maps of meaning
was that you could decide that you were
going to be friends with what you knew
or you could be friends with what you
didn't know
right and and so if you're friends with
what you know you try to prove your
point all the time and I'll fall prey to
that from time to time but once you
realize the depths of your ignorance and
you think well what I don't know is
inexhaustible and my troubles are
inexhaustible so I better have an
inexhaustible source to call on and I
can certainly call on the
inexhaustibility of my own ignorance and
that such and that Sid reverses
everything because all of a sudden the
fact that you don't know is actually
your greatest hope because there's
always the possibility that if you
lowered yourself Jung said Modern Men do
not see God because they do not look low
enough it's so brilliant and if if you
can if you can make friends with your
own ignorance then you open up the
landscape of Revelation to everything
you don't know
well that's so good if you have a
problem because the reason you have a
problem is because you don't know
something and so this is definitely an
injunction there is that the place where
on thou standest is Holy Ground And if
you're on Holy Ground and maybe you're
always on Holy Ground you should have
your damn shoes off and your eyes open
and yeah well that'd be a terrifying
thing too to uh to apprehend all right
gentlemen
that was that was that was a good start
well these were tough these were tough
ones
wait till the 10 commandments
until tomorrow good thank you thank you
you can imagine in some sense that what
Moses is having here when he encounters
the burning bush is something like an
aesthetic experience right it's
profoundly
attractive at least perhaps it's not
beautiful but perhaps it is and so that
beauty is calling to him and calls him
into a relationship that then transforms
itself into something Transcendent but
he's also prepared for that
characterologically the the killing of
the the Hebrew children you have to
understand it almost as if they're all
dead
except for Moses all the males have been
killed except for Moses there's just one
it's a reduction that's right it means
his equal it's never translated
correctly right the Hebrew is a helpmate
who is equal to him
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
foreign